# Senior Thesis: NLP Analysis of Suicide Fiction
NLP analysis of works of literature to examine the sociocultural construction of "suicide identity."

## Background and Motivation

“To Be or Not to Be,” from Shakespeare’s Hamlet, is one of the most famous monologues in all English literature, and it is certainly the most famous literary passage about suicide. While Hamlet does not survive his play, he does, in some sense, survive the desire to die, dying as he does at another’s hand. Other figures in literature do not survive their suicidality: Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina, Virginia Woolf’s Septimus Smith from her novel Mrs. Dalloway, Goethe’s Werther from The Sorrows of Young Werther, and many of Shakespeare’s own characters among them, including Othello, Romeo, and Juliet. Other suicidal figures in literature make it to the end of their narrative alive, including The Bell Jar’s Esther Greenwood, The Elegance of the Hedgehog’s Paloma, and the protagonist of Dostoevsky’s “The Dream of a Ridiculous Man.” In this thesis, I explore the question of how literary narratives about suicide formulate and figure the identity role of the suicidal person. By examining novels and plays, I aim to understand the set of “symbolic codes,” metaphors, motifs, and narrative norms populating one subset of cultural narratives—literary narratives—as concerns the topic of suicide and suicidality. I argue that an understanding of this cultural narrative system begins to elucidate the identity formation and narrativizing processes for those affected by suicide and suicidality; this group includes actively suicidal individuals, individuals who have previously been suicidal, people socially proximate to actively or previously suicidal individuals, and those bereaved by suicide. By developing a clearer picture of the symbols, semiotic codes, and narrative norms involved in these identity and narrative formation processes, we can move towards more effective policy-based, cultural, clinical, and interpersonal strategies and procedures to better care for and recognize these affected individuals.

## Methods and Data
My concern in this thesis is with meaning, narration, and sense-making; as such, the approaches I use must be able to attend to these phenomena and processes. I use a large corpus of text data comprised of approximately 145 novels and plays that in some way involve suicide or suicidality. I have access to this data through the HathiTrust database. As my research is non-consumptive—will not involve reading sections of copyrighted texts—I am allowed access to copyrighted text.

My analysis of this text will occur in three stages. In the first, I will rely on unsupervised, bottom-up methods. Here, I utilize Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic models to tease out topics from the texts and compare similarities and differences between the topics present in these suicide fictions. Additionally, I want to fine-tune a language model—likely a trigram prediction model—on the texts and see what the probability distributions are for predicted words following suicide-related prompts. I will also use k-means clustering to first separate the texts into k clusters and then separate chunks of text centered on a suicide-related word or phrase into k clusters. I will look at these clusters and attempt to interpret the clustering. Finally, I want to use association rule mining to extract relationships in the texts based on textual patterns.

In the second stage, I will use supervised neural network classifiers. Using textual data from public domain suicide fiction, I will go through and label chunks centered on a suicide-related word or phrase. I will label these chunks to serve as training data. I will go through and produce (but not label) suicide-related chunks for all testing data (copyrighted) texts as well. These data will be used to train and run two neural network models. The first is a fine-tuned version of BERT that will classify suicide-centered chunks into depicting suicide as an act of agency, an act of hopelessness, an act of romance, or an act of guilt. These buckets are derived from extensive review of the literature as pertains to suicide and its cultural depictions; they are of course imperfect and not 100% distinct. This classification is a downstream task and is not actually what I am most interested in. By fine-tuning BERT on a downstream task on the relevant texts, I want to look at the fine-tuned word embeddings in the embeddings layer and analyze relationships present through analogy completion, dimension extraction through vector arithmetic, and generally exploring relationships in the latent vector space. The second neural network model I want to run is recurrent neural network that performs sentiment analysis.

In the third and final stage, I will perform statistical analysis on my findings from the first two stages, seeing if factors such as the gender, sexuality, or era of the author impacts the results for any of my models. For this, I will likely use multiple regression. I will also create visualizations for my findings in the first two stages.

The first two stages of my research will be done in Python, and the third will be done in R. I am choosing to do the final stage in R because I have significant experience using the R library ggplot for data visualization and statistical methods but would have to learn from scratch how to implement these methods in Python.
